# CNNs for Early Earthquake Warning System

### Quincy Collinsworth, Senior Project 2026

The purpose of this study is to evalute the use of CNNs in Early Earthquake Warning (EEW) systems.
5 CNNs were trained, 4 identifying one category of an earthquake and 1 identifying all 4 categories in one model.
Those catagories are: magnitude, depth, location, and origin time.

The data used for this project comes from the Japanese Meteorological Agency catalog and the Japanese Seismic Network HiNet.

Here is the layout of the folders in this project.

## Assets:
Includes figures and referance papers used in this project
## Data_Scripts: 
These are scripts that build the database. The process for building the database is to find earthquakes that meet a certain criteria (see more in thesis report),
save their magnitude, origin time, location, depth, and P-Wave arrival times, download raw waveforms from HiNet, and sample those waveforms into training and testing .pt files.
This directory contains the following scripts:
    
dataParser.py : run this script to get an excel of valid earthquakes from the JMA catalog. You have to change the 'path' and 'output_file_name' in order to look at the right catelog
file and output it to the Excel you want to call it.

hinet.py: run this to download raw waveforms. The 'file_to_process' to process variable should be changed to reflect the .csv file you want to get waveforms from. Additionally,
you'll need to input your username and password to HiNet into the Client() function. To get credentials for Hinet, visit [Hinet](https://www.hinet.bosai.go.jp). 

hinet_boilerplate.py: Example downloading code from hinet

pt_maker.py: used to take raw waveforms and convert them into .pt files. Also saves info about the earthquakes. The inputs are the name of the csv/raw wave file file to process (they are the same, except the extension ".csv" which is added at the end, the month and year to look in (e.g January2010), the year, and the number of seconds of data to save. Here is an example of how to run this file:

    python pt_maker.py d201001a   January2010  2010 8

pt_merger.py: takes all the pt files generated by pt_maker.py and combines them into one .pt. The list of .pt files is a variable that needs to be changed depending on what you named the .pt files.

traintest.py: Splits the .pt file into training and test data given a .pt file containing indices

kmeans.py: Performs kmeans fitting on training data and prediction on test data. Then adds the location and origin class to the .pt files

datasplitter.py: Randomly comes up with indices to use to split .pt file into train/test 

dataMakers.sh: Runs the data creating pipeline for creating .pt files for train and test. The output "train.pt" and "test.pt" are the completed training/test data

plotter.py: Sandbox code to plot raw waveform data

#### Note(s)
To create the earthquake category csv files and download raw data, run the datParser.py and hinet.py scripts manually. Then to create the .pt files, run:

    ./dataMaker.sh

The hinet downloads take a very long time to run. Luckily, all of the raw waveforms used in this study are downloaded and included in this repo.

All of these scripts are designed to run in Linux environment. 

## Earthquake_Data
This directory contains the following directories

#### Catalogs
Here is where the JMA catalogs are stored

### PyTorch_Files
Here is where the .pt files containing data and labels are stored

### Raw Waveforms
Here is where the raw waveforms are stored

### Valid_Earthquake_Params
Here is where the .csvs containing earthquake params are stored.

## Models
Contains trained models as .pth files

## Third Party
Contains Win32 files required for hinet.py to run. For information on how to set up Win32 tools, visit [HiNetPy](https://pypi.org/project/HinetPy/)

## Training Scripts
Contains the scripts used to train CNNs. These were run in Google Collab. To run, upload "training.pt" and "test.pt" to your GoogleCollab session. Run on T4 GPUs

## ConfusionMtxScores.xlsx
This excel takes a confusion matrix and calculates the F1, precision, and recall score for you. I'm sure that PyTorch can do that too, but I didn't do that.



              
